Add tutorial about macros migration (#83)
scalacenter/scala-3-migration-guide: docs/macros/migration-tutorial.md

---
id: migration-tutorial
title: Migration Tutorial
---

In this tutorial we will learn two different approaches to migrate a macro library to Scala 3: cross-building and mixing macro definitions.

> Each approach makes the library available in Scala 3 while maintaining the Scala 2 compatibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each approach makes the library available in Scala 3 while maintaining Scala 2 compatibility.
```

## A Scala 2 Macro Definition

Let's define a simple Scala 2 macro library that contains a single macro method called `location`.

```scala

> package location

Reviewer: The first line could be a comment indicating what file we are in:
`// src/macro/location.scala`

import scala.reflect.macros.blackbox.Context
import scala.language.experimental.macros

case class Location(path: String, line: Int) {
  override def toString(): String = s"Line $line in $path"
}

object Macros {
  def location: Location = macro locationImpl

  def locationImpl(c: Context): c.Tree =  {
    import c.universe._
    val location = typeOf[Location]
    val line = Literal(Constant(c.enclosingPosition.line))
    val path = Literal(Constant(c.enclosingPosition.source.path))
    q"new $location($path, $line)"
  }
}
```

This location macro is very handy to capture a position in the code.

> We can try it by creating an `app` module that calls the `location` method.

Reviewer: Give the path of this file `src/main/scala/SimpleApp.scala`

```scala
import location.Macros._

object Main extends App {
  println(location)
}
```

> Running this application prints `Line 4 in src/main/scala/SimpleApp.scala`, since the call of `location` is made on the 4th line of the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running this application prints `Line 4 in src/main/scala/SimpleApp.scala`, since the call to `location` is made on the 4th line of the file.
```

So far our sbt project looks like this:

```scala
lazy val lib = project
  .in(file("lib"))
  .settings(
    scalaVersion := "2.13.3",
    libraryDependencies ++= Seq(
      "org.scala-lang" % "scala-reflect" % scalaVersion.value
    )
  )

lazy val app = project
  .in(file("app"))
  .settings(scalaVersion := "2.13.3")
  .dependsOn(lib)
```

## Moving to Scala 3

> sbt `1.4.+` is required

Let's try to compile our `app` module with Scala 3.
First we add the `sbt-dotty` plugin in the `project/plugins.sbt` file, then we change the `scalaVersion` setting of `app` to `0.27.0-RC1`.

```scala
addSbtPlugin("ch.epfl.lamp" % "sbt-dotty" % "0.4.2")
```

```scala
lazy val app = project
  .in(file("app"))
  .settings(scalaVersion := "0.27.0-RC1")

>   .dependsOn(locationLib)

Reviewer: Before it was called `lib`, is this a typo?

```

We reload our project and we try to compile.
It does not work!

```
sbt: location> app / compile
[error] -- Error: /location/app/src/main/scala/location/Main.scala:4:10 
[error] 4 |  println(location)
[error]   |          ^
[error]   |Scala 2 macro cannot be used in Dotty. See https://dotty.epfl.ch/docs/reference/dropped-features/macros.html
[error]   |To turn this error into a warning, pass -Xignore-scala2-macros to the compiler

> ```

Reviewer: It looks like this block is rendered using scala syntax, which looks a bit odd. You should specify that it is raw text

Reviewer: Maybe with ```shell

This error is pretty self explanatory: Scala 2 macro cannot be used in Scala 3.

We can turn this error into a warning by adding the `-Xignore-scala2-macros` flag in the `scalacOptions`

```shell
sbt: location> set app / scalacOptions += "-Xignore-scala2-macros"
...
sbt: location> app / compile
...
```

Compilation is successful but the compiler warns us the `location` call will crash at runtime, and indeed it does.

This little example shows that a macro definition must be implemented in Scala 3 to be consumed by Scala 3.

> At the same time, we want our library to keep being available in Scala 2. There are two available solution for doing so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the same time, we want our library to keep Scala 2 compatibility. There are two available solution for doing so:
```

  - Cross-building
  - Mixing macro definitions in Scala 3

While the first technique has been known and proven useful for quite some time, the second approach is made possible by TASTy and the brand new Scala 2 TASTy reader.
If you already know how to cross compile you might want to learn about mixing macro definitions by jumping straight to the [Mixing Macro Definition](#mixing-macro-definitions) part of this tutorial.

## Cross-building

Cross-building is a well-known technique to build and publish a project against different Scala versions.

It gives you the ability to:
  - load different binary versions of the same set of dependencies

>   - organize your source code in Scala version specific source directories

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - organize your source code in version-specific directories
```

Author: Your suggestion removes a lot of valuable information: Scala version rather than project version, source directory rather than resource or target directory...

The term `Scala-version specific source directrory` is used in [sbt documentation](https://www.scala-sbt.org/1.x/docs/Cross-Build.html#Scala-version+specific+source+directory), so I think I can keep it.

  - configure and call different instances of the Scala compiler

>   - package and publish the different compiled binaries of your project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - package and publish the different binaries of your project
```

Similar cross-building mechanisms are provided by a number of build tools, among which sbt and Mill.
You can go to the [sbt documentation](https://www.scala-sbt.org/1.x/docs/Cross-Build.html) or the [Mill documentation](https://www.lihaoyi.com/mill/page/cross-builds.html) to familiarize yourself with it.

As we have seen in the [Compatibility Reference](../compatibility.md) page, Scala 2.13 and Scala 3.0 binaries are generally compatible, making the cross-building approach not needed in many cases.

However it is still useful in those two cases:
  - maintain support for Scala 2.12 and older versions
  - cross-building a macro library

> ### Setting up cross-compilation

Reviewer: For  all these `###` headers I would like to see the section number like 1, 2, 3 to highlight the fact that you are describing the sequence of steps to take in order to achieve cross building

    }
  )
```

Note the dependency to `scala-reflect` becomes useless in Scala 3.
We use the `isDotty` setting, provided by `sbt-dotty`, to create version specific list of dependencies.

After reloading the sbt shell, we can easily load the Scala 3 version of the project by running `++0.27.0-RC1`.
Then we can go back to the Scala 2.13 version by running `++2.13.3`.

The sbt `show lib / unmanagedSourceDirectories` command prints the list of available source directories:
```shell
> sbt: location> ++2.13.3; show lib / unmanagedSourceDirectories
[info] * /location/lib/src/main/scala
[info] * /location/lib/src/main/scala-2.13
[info] * /location/lib/src/main/scala-2
[info] * /location/lib/src/main/java
> sbt: location> ++0.27.0-RC1; show lib / unmanagedSourceDirectories
[info] * /location/lib/src/main/scala
[info] * /location/lib/src/main/scala-0.27
[info] * /location/lib/src/main/scala-3
[info] * /location/lib/src/main/java
```

As we can see, an sbt project defines a shared `scala` source directory and some version-specific source directories.
Some depend on the major version, `scala-2` and `scala-3`, and others depend on the precise binary version, `scala-2.13` and `scala-0.27`.

> Thus, we can organize our sources depending on its compatibility spectrum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, we can organize our sources depending on their compatibility spectrum.
```

> The goal is to reach a state at which the `lib / Compile` and the `lib / Test` artifacts both compile in Scala 2 and Scala 3.
> 
> Thus you will be able to write the Scala 3 code incrementally:
>  - Add the Scala 3 signature of the wanted method in the `scala-3` folder
>  - Move the tests of this method from the `scala-2` folder to the `scala` folder
>  - Make the tests pass in Scala 3 by providing the implementation
>  - Iterate
> 
> You might also want to have some Scala version specific tests that are targeted at the implementation internals.

### Providing the Scala 3 implementation

We managed to make our `lib` project cross-compile in 2.13 and 3.0.
But the produced Scala 3 binaries do not contain the `location` method.
We can see that by trying to compile the `app` module in Scala 3.

Let's add the Scala 3 `location` method.

We add a `Macros.scala` file in the `scala-3` directory and we draw the signature of the `location` method.
**It is worth noting that the signature of the method must be the same in Scala 2 and Scala 3.**

```scala
package location

object Macros:
  def location: Location = ???
```

This alone should make our `app` module compile in Scala 3.

> There are no magic formula to convert a Scala 2 macro into Scala 3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no magic formula to convert a Scala 2 macro into Scala 3.
```

> One must learn about the available new features of Scala 3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One needs to learn about the new Scala 3 metaprogramming API.
```

You can have a look at the list of [available metaprogramming features](metaprogramming-features.md).

We eventually come up with this implementation:

```scala
package location

import scala.quoted.{QuoteContext, Expr}

object Macros:
  inline def location: Location = ${locationImpl}

  def locationImpl(using ctx: QuoteContext): Expr[Location] =
    import ctx.tasty.rootPosition
    val file = Expr(rootPosition.sourceFile.jpath.toString)
    val line = Expr(rootPosition.startLine + 1)
    '{new Location($file, $line)}
```

### Final solution

Our `lib` project now contains the following files:

- `src/main/scala/postion/Postion.scala`: The `Position` case class
- `src/main/scala-2/position/Macros.scala`: The Scala 2 implementation of the `location` macro method
- `src/main/scala-3/position/Macros.scala`: The Scala 3 implementation of the `location` macro method

We are now ready to publish our `location` library using the [sbt `publish` task](https://www.scala-sbt.org/1.x/docs/Publishing.html).
It will create two artifacts: the `lib_2.13` and the `lib_3.0` artifacts.

> ![Cross-building Architecture](assets/macros/cross.svg)

Reviewer: The figure looks a bit odd: why aren't the app boxes on the left ? We usually read left to right in English

Author: You are right, but I don't feel like re-working them again...

A Scala 2.13 project must depend on the `lib_2.13` artifact whereas a Scala 3.0 project must depend on the `lib_3.0` artifact.

## Mixing Macro Definitions

> As it is explained in the [Compatibility Reference](../compatibility.md) page, the Scala 2 compiler can read the signatures of Scala 3 methods, and conversely the Scala 3 compiler can read the signatures of the Scala 2 methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As it is explained in the [Compatibility Reference](../compatibility.md) page, the Scala 2 compiler can read the signatures of Scala 3 methods, and conversely the Scala 3 compiler can read the signatures of Scala 2 methods.
```

A Scala 2 macro implementation cannot be compiled by the Scala 3 compiler.

> However, there is nothing preventing the Scala 3 compiler to type check a Scala 2 macro definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, there is nothing preventing the Scala 3 compiler from type checking a Scala 2 macro definition.
```

Suppose a Scala 2 macro is defined in a Scala 3 module and implemented in a Scala 2 module.
Then the Scala 2 compiler would be able to find that definition in the Scala 3 artifact and execute its implementation in the Scala 2 binaries.

This idea sets the ground to the mixing macros technique that we detail further below using the `location` example.
It is compatible with any build tool that can mix Scala 2 and Scala 3 modules.

> Mixing macro requires the TASTy reader that will be shipped in Scala 2.13.4

> ### Creating the Scala 3 module

Reviewer: Again I would like numbers for the steps of the procedure

  - A Scala 2 `app` module that calls the `location` macros

```scala
lazy val lib = project
  .in(file("lib"))
  .settings(
    scalaVersion := "2.13.4",
    libraryDependencies ++= Seq(
      "org.scala-lang" % "scala-reflect" % scalaVersion.value
    )
  )

lazy val app = project
  .in(file("app"))
  .settings(scalaVersion := "2.13.4")
  .dependsOn(lib)
```

Let's create a new Scala 3 module in which we will move our macro definition.
We call it `macroLib`.

```scala
lazy val macroLib = project
  .in(file("macro-lib"))
  .settings(
    scalaVersion := "0.27.0-RC1"
  )
  .dependsOn(lib)
```

To test this new module, we make `app` depend on it. Also we make it cross compile.

```scala
lazy val app = project
  .in(file("app"))
  .settings(
    scalaVersion := "2.13.4",
    crossScalaVersion := Seq("2.13.4", "0.27.0-RC1")  
  )
  .dependsOn(macroLib)
```

We are ready to move our Scala 2 macro definition by creating a `Macros.scala` file in `macroLib` that contains the following:

```scala
package location

import scala.language.experimental.macros

object Macros:
  def location: Location = macro Scala2Macros.locationImpl
```

The `locationImpl` is still in the `lib` module.

> Note that we moved it to a `Scala2Macros` object because we cannot have two `Macros` object in the same package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that we moved it to a `Scala2Macros` object because we cannot have two `Macros` objects in the same package.
```

```scala
package location

import scala.reflect.macros.blackbox.Context

case class Location(path: String, line: Int) {
  override def toString(): String = s"Line $line in $path"
}

object Scala2Macros {
  def locationImpl(c: Context): c.Tree =  {
    import c.universe._
    val location = typeOf[Location]
    val line = Literal(Constant(c.enclosingPosition.line))
    val path = Literal(Constant(c.enclosingPosition.source.path))
    q"new $location($path, $line)"
  }
}
```

We try to compile our `macroLib` module.

```
sbt: location> macroLib / compile
[error] -- Error: /location/macro-lib/src/main/scala/location/Macros.scala:6:6 
[error] 6 |  def location: Location = macro Scala2Macros.locationImpl
[error]   |  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
[error]   |  No Scala 3 implementation found for this Scala 2 macro.
[error] one error found
```

The compiler is telling us that a Scala 3 implementation is missing for the `location` macro.
It makes sense because the Scala 2 implementation cannot be executed by the Scala 3 compiler.

> Let's add the most simple implementation possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's add the most simple implementation possible:
```

```scala
package location

import scala.language.experimental.macros

object Macros:
  def location: Location = macro Scala2Macros.locationImpl
  inline def location: Location = ${locationImpl}

  def locationImpl(using ctx: QuoteContext): Expr[Location] = ???
```

The `inline` keyword is required here to tell the compiler the method is the Scala 3 counterpart of the `location` macro definition.

The `app` module can now be compiled and executed in Scala 2.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```shell
```

sbt: location> ++2.13.4; app / run
[info] running app.Main 
Line 6 in /location/app/src/main/scala/app/Main.scala
[info] app / run completed
```

Can the `app` module be compiled in Scala 3?
To answer this question we must remind ourselves that macros are executed at compile time.
Here the Scala 3 implementation throws a `NotImplementedError`, hence the answer is no.
We can try and see the exception being thrown at compile-time.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```shell
```

sbt: location> ++0.27.0-RC1; app / run
[info] compiling 1 Scala source to /loaction/app/target/scala-0.27/classes ...
[error] -- Error: /location/app/src/main/scala/app/Main.scala:6:10 
[error] 6 |  println(location)
[error]   |          ^^^^^^^^
[error]   |          Exception occurred while executing macro expansion.
[error]   |          scala.NotImplementedError: an implementation is missing
[error]   |             at scala.Predef$.$qmark$qmark$qmark(Predef.scala:347)
[error]   |             at location.Macros$.locationImpl(Macros.scala:15)
[error]   |
[error]   | This location contains code that was inlined from Main.scala:6
...
```

### Providing the Scala 3 implementation

> Again, there are no magic formula to convert a Scala 2 macro into Scala 3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Again, there is no magic formula to port a Scala 2 macro to Scala 3.
```

> One must learn about the available new features of Scala 3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One needs to learn about the new Scala 3 metaprogramming API.
```

You can have a look at the list of [available metaprogramming features](metaprogramming-features.md).

We eventually come up with this implementation:

```scala
package location

import scala.language.experimental.macros
import scala.quoted.{QuoteContext, Expr}

object Macros:
  def location: Location = macro Scala2Macros.locationImpl
  inline def location: Location = ${locationImpl}

  def locationImpl(using ctx: QuoteContext): Expr[Location] =
    import ctx.tasty.rootPosition
    val file = Expr(rootPosition.sourceFile.jpath.toString)
    val line = Expr(rootPosition.startLine + 1)
    '{new Location($file, $line)}
```

The `app` module can now be compiled and executed in Scala 3:

```
sbt: location> ++0.27.0-RC1; app / run
[info] running app.Main 
Line 6 in /location/app/src/main/scala/app/Main.scala
[info] app / run completed
```

> ### Final solution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Solution overview
```

Our `location` library is now composed of two modules:
  - The Scala 2.13 `lib` module containing the `Location` data structure and the Scala 2 macro implementation
  - The Scala 3.0 `macroLib` module containing both the Scala 2 macro definition and the Scala 3 macro implementation

![Mixing-macros Architecture](assets/macros/mix.svg)

Publishing this library will create two artifacts.
However we now have a single entry point for all projects.
An application can depend on the `macro-lib_3.0` artifact, no matter if its codebase is compiled in Scala 2.13 or Scala 3.0.

## Conclusion

> We have learnt two different techniques to make a Scala 2 macro library available in Scala 3. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have learnt two different techniques to make a Scala 2 library containing macros available in Scala 3. 
```

> When choosing between the two you must take the architecture into consideration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When choosing between the two you must take the architecture into consideration:
```

>   - In the first case, **cross** building, you have one module that produces two Scala version specific artifacts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - When **cross** building, you have one module that produces two Scala version specific artifacts.
```

The consumer project must find out the right binary version of the library depending on its own Scala version.

>   - In the second case, **mixing macro definitions**, we have a Scala 3.0 module that depends on a Scala 2.13 module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - In the second case, **mixing macro definitions**, we have a Scala 3.0 module that depends on a Scala 2.13 module.
```
```suggestion
  - When **mixing macro definitions**, we have a Scala 3.0 module that depends on a Scala 2.13 module.
```
